Hello and welcome, my name is Jason Jane,
and I am an engineering manager here at Apple.
Today, I'm very excited to talk to you
about bringing your most demanding games to iPhone.
Earlier this summer, we shared three great talks
about the new tools and best practices
for quickly bringing the most demanding PC and console games
to the unified and scalable platform of Apple silicon Macs.
We shared that you have everything you need to deliver
an amazing, uncompromising gaming experience
with Mac’s advanced graphics, fantastic performance,
immersive audio, stunning displays,
and feature-rich software.
Now, I'm excited to share that the latest iPhone 15 Pro
and iPhone 15 Pro Max models join Apple silicon Macs
to build on this unified platform for next-level gaming.
These new iPhones play every iOS game and run every iOS app.
And now, iPhones can also play the highest end games
without compromise.
It has the power of a game console, but now in your pocket.
iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max include new features,
like faster CPU and GPU performance,
hardware support for PC and console textures,
and additional system resources,
which make targeting these iPhones
as easy as targeting a Mac.
For the rest of this talk,
I'm going to cover the features and tools we've added
to help bring your game to iPhone.
First, I'll describe the tools and strategies
to create your game's porting plan.
Then I'll describe how to specifically target
the iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max.
I'll then tell you how to optimize for long play sessions,
how to provide the best experience
for games designed around controllers,
and finally, how to handle large,
high-quality assets in your game.
To start, let's think about creating a game plan.
What is the porting process like,
and how can you take incremental steps
and create quick iteration techniques
for yourself and your team
when bringing your game to iPhone?
You might not be surprised to hear that Kojima Productions
started their porting journey to iPhone
for the breakthrough game Death Stranding
by first bringing it to Apple silicon Macs.
By starting with a port to the Mac,
they were targeting the same software APIs,
unified memory architecture,
advanced hardware and GPU capabilities
shared between Apple silicon Macs and the iPhone.
During the initial stages of work,
they could rapidly iterate on Macs
using Xcode and instruments.
They had the additional memory
and resources of powerful desktop Macs.
The extra storage and memory
for debugging and test scaffolding
is super useful during development.
And they could more easily stand up their work
and test with command line automation
and with keyboard, mouse, and controller input
right at their desks.
Once running on the Mac,
the unified architecture of Apple silicon
and the resources and capabilities
of iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max
meant that bringing their Mac port over to iPhone was quick,
taking just a few days to see the running game.
There's simply no other platform with the same consistency
and ability to scale in this way.
Scaling naturally from portable iPhones and iPads
to the Mac Mini and iMac,
and onto the most powerful desktop Mac Studio and Mac Pro,
this is the power of Apple silicon.
To kickstart your port to Mac on your way to iPhone,
we also recommend using the Game Porting Toolkit.
This toolkit gives you early insight
into how the graphics and shaders of your PC game
will perform on Apple silicon.
You simply run your unmodified Windows PC game
right on a Mac to try it out.
So before you recompile your source code,
convert your custom shaders from HLSL,
reimplement your graphic subsystem,
and convert your use of audio, input,
display and HDR rendering, instead of doing that work
before you see your first scene running on a Mac.
And before you start debugging and optimizing for iPhone,
we recommend that you run
and analyze your unmodified windows binary on Mac
to help you profile and understand your game's behavior
on Apple silicon and to help create your game plan.
There's lots more detail about starting your porting journey
in part one of our "Bring your game to Mac" series of talks.
If your game needs next level features,
performance and capabilities of iPhone 15 Pro,
then you can directly target those devices
as your minimum specification.
We've defined an iPhone Performance Gaming Tier
in iOS 17 and in the app store.
This is a flag you add
to your UI required device capability section
of your app's info plist file.
By adding this flag, you are specifying your min spec.
Your app will only be available
for purchase, installation, and review
by customers with devices at least this capable.
To establish this min spec, use Xcode
to add an entry to the required device capability section
of your info plist.
To set this min spec feature, you'll also target iOS 17
as your minimum deployment target.
Once you do this, the app still will mark your game
as available for purchase and install only for customers
with supported devices.
Here's what a customer with iPhone 13 Pro might see.
If your game can scale its quality
and performance dynamically across all iPhones on iOS 17,
then you should also consider
how you might enhance it for iPhone 15 Pro.
Scaling is not unusual for PC and console games,
and it's a great way
to target the largest addressable market.
To optionally take advantage
of hardware-accelerated mesh shading or ray tracing,
just query for the Apple 9 GPU family
to ensure that you're on a device with an Apple A17 Pro GPU.
Now let's talk about how you can optimize
for high quality consistent performance
in long-running game sessions on iPhone.
I'll cover visualizing performance,
a new performance profile,
techniques for optimizing shaders,
and how to use MetalFX on iPhone.
Visualizing your performance in real time
is easy with a metal performance HUD.
Enable the metal performance HUD during day-to-day testing
to quickly spot missed frames and memory leaks.
The HUD shows you the GPU and resolution being used,
the instantaneous frame rate, the presentation interval,
and the approximation of the amount of GPU time being used.
It highlights high and low values for these statistics,
shows memory usage,
and provides a graph of the last few seconds of data.
To learn more, check out "Discover Metal Performance HUD."
We're introducing a new system performance profile
called Sustained Execution Mode
with iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max.
The default system performance profile
aims to provide the best performance in three time domains,
the highest possible performance for short burst workloads,
followed by a period for providing consistent performance
for the majority of customer sessions,
and finally, the steady state,
which honors device constraints for longer workloads.
This leaves you needing to decide how to tune your game.
Do you tune for initial performance
and have your game performance change over time,
or do you spend time during development
allowing performance to settle and then retune accordingly?
To alleviate this effort
and provide a consistent experience,
we're introducing Sustained Execution Mode
for iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max.
By opting into this new profile,
you can experience performance
that is consistent with the steady state
right from app launch.
This allows you to quickly identify
a level of quality and performance appropriate
for the target device,
and you can be confident your players
will experience the exact same consistent quality.
To enable sustained execution mode
while your game is running,
add the entitlement to your application.
Simply go into Xcode
and in the sign in and capabilities tool,
add the Sustained Execution Capability.
Remember, you'll also need to provision this entitlement
in the provisioning profile for your application.
You do this in the profile section
of your Apple developer account.
Metal supports shader pre-compilation,
which is another important performance technique.
On mobile devices, you should generally avoid
on-device compilation of shaders from source
as it isn't power efficient.
On-device compilation at runtime
can also cause unexpected hitches.
When you are porting a PC or console game,
pre-compiling is even more important
as you likely have a lot more shaders
and need them ready as quickly as possible.
Always use ahead of time compilation
by the Metal shader converter and the Metal compiler
to produce a metal lib at app build time
and package it in your bundle.
In some specific cases, you can also take the metal lib
all the way to finalized GPU binary
by using the metal-tt to cogen for Metal GPU family 9.
For more details, please check out,
"Bring your game to Mac, Part 2: Compile your shaders,"
as the same advice for porting your game to the Mac
equally applies to iPhone.
Finally, MetalFX is another fantastic performance technique
new this year to iOS 17.
MetalFX was introduced last year for the Mac.
It helps improve game performance
by generate high quality, high resolution images
for many fewer pixels, saving power and time.
MetalFX offers two upscaling effects,
spatial, which offers greater performance benefit
and temporal for the best quality.
This year, we are bringing the power of MetalFX to iOS.
Spatial upscaling is available
on all iPhones supported in iOS 17,
and temporal upscaling is available
on devices with A14 and newer.
Rendering to a lower resolution
is one method of improving the performance of your game.
By reducing the GPU work,
you can save power and achieve a higher frame rate.
Every iPhone has a high quality, built-in display scaler
that automatically scales the contents of a CAMetalLayer
to the native display resolution.
You're probably already using it like this.
With MetalFX, your target resolution can remain the same,
so you continue to take advantage of the display scaler,
but your game now renders to a lower resolution.
MetalFX can help demanding games achieve stable frame rates
on both ProMotion and non-ProMotion displays.
Depending on your game workload,
you'll want to experiment combining different MetalFX
and display upskilling ratios
to achieve the best balance for performance and quality.
For more details on best practices for using MetalFX,
please refer to past WWDC sessions,
"Boost performance with MetalFX Upscaling,"
and "Bring your game to Mac, Part 3: Render with Metal."
Interacting with your game on iPhone has never been easier,
thanks to great controller support that's now even better.
Many PC and console games
are designed around using game controllers for input.
The great news is that doesn't change
when you bring your game to iPhone.
iOS supports connecting
to all the most popular game controllers,
including a new generation of form fitting controllers
that fit and work perfectly with every size of iPhone 15
using low latency USBC.
This PlayStation theme controller from Backbone
is one of my favorites.
If your game is best experienced with a controller,
let your players know
by adding the game controller's capability,
using the sign in and capability section in Xcode.
And then add the GCRequiresControllerUserInteraction
dictionary to the info plist array,
and include an iOS key with a Boolean value of YES.
With this configuration set, players will see
a controller recommended badge in the app store,
which leads to more details
about using and comparing game controllers
and where they can find and purchase
compatible form-fitting and standalone controllers.
But the iPhone also revolutionized mobile gaming
with low latency, high accuracy multi-touch.
It's important and even part of the app store review process
that your game supports touch interaction too.
This year, we've made it even easier to quickly add
even more customized touch controls to your app.
The GC Virtual Controller API
now supports drawing your own onscreen controls
right where you want them.
Your touch handling is converted
into game controller input events,
which lets you customize the look and feel of your game UI
while still leaving intact the majority
of your game controller input logic.
Lastly, iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max
now seamlessly support your highest quality PC
and console assets.
The original base assets for your games can be very large,
high resolution texture data, high polygon count geometry,
and uncompressed audio and voice data.
It's the job of your asset pipeline
to convert and package these files
to fit into available PC and console system resources
and to efficiently interoperate with the target hardware,
taking advantage of accelerated features
like texture decompression, geometry instancing
and audio mixing, for example.
Before iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max,
you may have worried about the effort
of targeting mobile devices.
You may have even created an entirely new,
generic mobile asset pipeline
to generate highly crunched assets
to fit into limited resource space
or to handle mobile-only texture formats.
But with iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max,
you can simply use your existing PC
and console asset pipeline.
Hardware accelerated BC and texture support
means there's no longer a need
to convert your existing large asset packages,
although you can see even better compression
and higher quality with ASDC compression.
And more dedicated memory means seamlessly loading,
storing, and moving large, high-quality assets
that will really shine on the Retina ProMotion displays,
and you'll save time with a simplified porting effort.
Query for BCn availability
using the metal device inspection function,
supportsBCTextureCompression.
If you also support other iPhone models running iOS 17,
using assets compress with ASTC compression
is a great choice for even better quality
and higher compression ratios.
To maximize available memory, be sure to enable
the existing increased memory limit entitlement in Xcode
in your Apple developer profile.
With more resources, you can render with more detail,
use higher resolution depth and shadow buffers,
and implement more complex,
resource-intense rendering algorithms.
If you're scaling across devices,
you can also use os_proc_available_memory
to dynamically determine which resources are available.
To bring large assets to iPhone,
your app will need to dynamically download them.
You have three ways to do this, On Demand Resources,
Background Assets,
or your own custom downloading implementation.
When downloading, be sure to store them into allocation
where they aren't impacting customer backups
and where the system can purge them if needed.
As your assets arrive, move them into the caches directory
under your data container's library directory.
This directory is not backed up
with important per application user data.
The system also guarantees
it will not purge this cache needlessly.
Learn more about the latest downloading technologies
in the most recent background assets talk from WWDC.
So that wraps up our best practices.
We hope you bring your high-end game
to iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max without compromises.
The Apple A17 PRO GPU represents a huge leap
in power and graphical features,
which makes bringing your game to iPhone quick and easy.
Together these iPhone 15 pro models
join the family of Apple silicon Macs
to build a unified target platform
for your next-level gaming projects.
I'm excited to see and play the games you bring to iPhone.